basic sentence structure
adjectives and pi
preverbs
prepositions
o and anu
multiple subjects/pred/objects
names
asking things
taso and la
numbers

kili anu kasi la seme li pona tawa sina

(add in 'a!' somewhere)

Alright! Let's start off with the very absolute basics of saying things in toki pona.

In super dumb basic terms, a sentence can be divided into 2 (sometimes 3) main bits:

subject (the main actor/object)
predicate:
 verb (what the subject is/does)
 object (what the subject does to)

Let's see an example in English:

John eats an apple.
John is the main actor, his action is eating and what he eats is an apple!

(btw, the main order used in English is SVO (subject verb object), but other languages (actually most of them!) may use other orders of things)

In toki pona, it works much the same way (in SVO order too!), but here, the different phrase bits are separated by 2 particles:

li: comes before the predicate
e: comes before the object (if there is one)

Since we're just starting, i'll give you some words to start off with, some of them you already know (if you looked at the intro first):

1 . mi
2 . sina
3 . ona
4 . li
5 . e
6 . toki
7 . pona
8 . suli
9 . jan
10. lape
11. ike
12. moku

Let's do... I'm eating. How would you say that?

mi li lape?

Actually no, only for mi and sina (when they're on their own) you don't actually use li! It might look like it makes it more ambiguous but it actually works fine.

mi moku.

Also, notice that moku doesn't have any tense. "mi moku" can mean i eat, i ate, i will eat, i have eaten, i am eating, etc etc etc.
Again, context will tell you which is right.

Cool! What else?

ona li suli.

They are / It is... Big? Important? Old?
Again, context will tell.

What about they are talking?

ona li toki.

Some more examples but with objects this time:

moku li pona e mi.

toki li suli e jan.

Another thing you might have picked up in the intro is how one word can almost act as an adjective and modify the one that comes before it!
Actually that's important: the modifier modifies the word(s) that come *before* it, instead of after it, like in english.

Say, "big speech."

You wouldn't say suli toki, that would mean something more like greatness that has to do with speech or smth like that.

toki suli, on the other hand, can mean big speech, or important language or etc.

This is actually how the language's name works!

toki pona means good language or "the language of good". How nice!

I'll talk more about how modifiers work in the next lesson BUT, before i go, some more thingies!

sina pona.

This means "you're good". But you can also use it in a conversation to mean "thank you!"

"Hey, I made some food"
"Hey, that tastes real good, great job!"
"sina pona!"

"... what"

Another SUPER DUPER important thing to learn in toki pona is this:

jan pona.

It means "good person", but is also the main way to say "friend" in toki pona!

sina jan pona.
sina pona!

So... that's it for now.

What??? Already over??
C'mon i only learned twelve words :'(

Yeah, but there are still over 100 words left to go, and a bunch more things to learn to say in toki pona so...
That's it for now! 
You now know how to:
Say basic sentences in toki pona
Call someone your friend
Say thank you
(i prob forgot other things too)
in toki pona!

Next time, even more words so you can know how to say even more things.
mi tawa!
